I"<h2 id="1-interpretability">1. Interpretability</h2>

<p>You’ve done all the work. You’ve planned the project. You’ve found data. You cleaned and organized the data. You created a model, you validated the model and you just want to put a bow on it and be done. Well, one thing that you need to consider before you wrap it all up, is who is going to make the decision? Who’s using the results and the insights that you got from your analysis? Because you have a couple of choices. One is, maybe you’re developing something that is for the benefit and use of algorithms. This is, for instance, a recommendation system which automatically puts something in front of people or a mortgage application system, which process it immediately while people are still on the website. In that case, the machines are the ones making the decisions and machines don’t need to understand what they’re working with. They have the data and if you set up the algorithm properly, they can just kind of run with it. Also, machines and algorithms can create complex models much more complex than a human can easily understand and implement them directly and immediately. And so if you’ve done your analysis in such a way there is going to be finished working with by an algorithm, then you don’t need to worry too much about how interpretable it is, because the machines not spending time on that. On the other hand, if you have done your work for the benefit of humans, humans need to understand the principles involved. They need to know why things are happening the way that they are. So, they can then take that information, they can reason from the data, to apply it to new situations. It’s the principles that are going to be important and so you’re going to have to be able to explain that to them as a result of your work in Data Science. Now, the trick is, some results are easy to interpret. Here’s a decision tree I showed you earlier. It’s about classifying flowers as one of the three different species. You only have to make three decisions. It says, first look at the pedal length and if it’s long, then look at the pedal width and if that is short, then look at the pedal length again and if you do that, you can make a very good classification. This is a very simple system and human accessible, anybody can work with this. On the other hand, some other results are very difficult to interpret. This is another decision tree that I showed you earlier. It’s enormously complicated by regular human standards, you’d have kind of a hard time following through with this. And algorithms that are made in Data Science, like with Deep Learning, are infinitely more complex than this. And so you’re going to have a hard time explaining to somebody else, how this works and why it set up the way it is and what they can do with it. The point of all this, is it in your analysis, interpretability is critical. You’re telling a story and you need to be able to make sense of your findings, so you can make reasonable and justifiable recommendations. Tell a story that makes sense, is clear and compelling. Only then, can you see the value from your Data Science project.</p>

<h2 id="2-actionable-insights">2. Actionable insights</h2>

<p>If you’re working in a startup or really any entrepreneurial or organizational setting then you know that your work is all about getting results and that brings up something that I mentioned earlier in this course I want to mention again from one of my heroes, the American psychologist and philosopher William James who said “my thinking is first and last “and always for the sake of my doing.” His point is that human cognition is designed to fulfill goals, to help us reach particular ends and I like to summarize that and apply it towards data science with this thought that data and data science is for doing. It exists to help us do things and the reason we do these projects is to help us accomplish things that are important to us. Remember, when you did the project, there was a goal, there was some motivation. What motivated the project? What sorts of things did you stick up on the wall? These are questions you wanted answered. Why was the project conducted? The goal is usually to direct some kind of particular action. Should we open a new store over here? Should we reduce the price over here? Should we partner up with this other organization over here and your analysis should be able to guide those actions and so can you remember what those clear questions were and can you give a clear well articulated and justifiable response to those questions based on your data science project? When you do, there’s a few things you want to keep in mind. You need to focus on things that are controllable. The analysis might say that companies founded in the 80s have greater success but if you’re founded in 2015, there’s not much you can do about it. So focus on something that is under your control and try to make it something that’s specific. Also, be practical. Think about the return on investment or ROI. You need to work on things and give actions where the impact will be large enough to justify the efforts. Also, if you’re giving recommendations to a client, make sure it’s something that they are actually capable of doing and then also you want to build up. You want to have sequential steps. You want to make a small recommendation, carry through on it and then build on it as you see the results of each earlier step. The data science project is designed to fulfill all of these requirements in a way that the benefits will be visible to the client as you help them find an answer to their question and if you can get that done then you’ve done exactly what you meant to do when you started in data science and that is worthy of an office celebration so congratulations.</p>

<h2 id="next-steps">Next steps</h2>

<p>Consider learning new things, like, for instance, how to program in Python or R, or how to work with open data, or how to build algorithms for machine learning and artificial intelligence. Any of these would be fantastically useful tools and approaches in data science. Also, learn how to apply the things that you’ve worked with. Get some courses on data-driven decision making in business settings, get more information on business strategy and how the information you use can help any organization make better decisions in their own operations. And then get information on how people work, and the elements that are most important in fields like marketing or nonprofits or healthcare or education, or whatever is of greatest use and interest to you.</p>
:ET