I"R.<h2 id="1-risk-management-in-reporting">1. Risk management in reporting</h2>

<p>I once had the hair-raising task of taking 12 kids camping. Getting everyone’s attention, then successfully communicating when I was needing them to hear was one of the biggest challenges of my life. You wouldn’t think communicating something on a project would be as difficult as working with those kids. However, communicating something as comprehensive as the risk on your project can be a far-reaching and tedious task. Incorporating risk management into your regular reporting approach is a great way to bring your risk management to light and keep a bit of balance in your own life. Here are some tips to do that. First and foremost, put a risk section in your regular status report. Discuss what you’ve accomplished, deadlines you might have missed, and risk mitigation tasks you’re going to be tackling in the next reporting period. Status reporting should be concise, consistent, and frequent. So should your references to risk. Documenting risks in your status report ensures you’re communicating the risk to your project team, keeping your sponsor up to date on the true position of your project, preparing stakeholders for any corrective action you may need to take, and shows you’re planning ahead. The second way to incorporate risk management in your reporting is to use your project schedule. It’s a good practice to associate risks with tasks. Using dates from your project schedule, you can create sections in your schedule or risk response plan for risks that have been bypassed, that you must be aware of in the moment, and that you’ll be looking at in future periods. A third technique is to distribute significant parts of your risk response plan. Highlights the risks you’re currently focused on and provide details to stakeholders that can help you detect and manage them. This is particularly helpful if you need to provide more detail on your risks or your organization has a particular sensitivity to a certain risk. For example, if your organization is sensitive to schedule risk, you might have a separate, detailed report to indicate when your schedule has varied from the plan. You can include details as to why it’s varied and any specific actions you’re planning to get you back on schedule. During times when there are lots of schedule risks, your risk response plan extract can go even further. You can detail the risk triggers and the actions to take if the risk triggers are noticed. It’s also useful to make note of any meetings or communications that happen around the risks, such as a phone call or email. This basically highlights how you’re managing the risk throughout your project. Make the effort to focus on your risk reporting, and you’ll likely be able to suggest the best way to enhance or avoid most any risk that can surface on your project, and none of your kids or project stakeholders will get lost in the woods.</p>

<h2 id="2-when-to-execute-a-risk-response">2. When to execute a risk response</h2>

<p>Author Mandy Hale has said, “Pick your battles. “You don’t have to show up “for every argument you’re invited to.” So it goes with project risk responses. Executing every risk response action all the time will drive everyone crazy and take up precious time and money. Project managers who understand when to execute a risk response and when to hold off are the most effective when managing their projects. There are three ways to approach the execution of your risk response actions. The first is to execute proactively. For example, in a component design and assembly project, you may believe there’s a risk in making a telephone component out of fiberglass because you may need a solution that’s going to be more rigid. So using steel to make the component has been proposed as a response action. You can address this risk proactively by spending the money and time to have sample fiberglass components manufactured ahead of time. From these samples, you can determine if the rigidity risk is likely to occur. Basically, you’re trying to balance your triple constrains, time, scope, and cost. Being proactive and doing something ahead of time typically gives you the best result when it comes to risk management. But it can have drawbacks in costs and potentially time. Second, use an assess and respond approach. You test the fiberglass parts at the prescribed time in your schedule and then you decide on the immediate actions to take based on the results. If the fiberglass works well, you don’t spend any money on a response action you don’t need. If the risk is valid and the fiberglass is too flexible, you spend the money to correct situation by using steel. Going down this assess and respond route could cost you nothing if it works. But if the result isn’t the level of quality you need, you could incur triple constraint impacts when you least need those challenges. Consider your options carefully. The third option is to be reactive, you change something after the impact of the risk has been felt. If the fiberglass isn’t acceptable once you deploy it, then you correct it after installation. This will probably involve some additional testing processes and coming up with something like reinforcing the fiberglass part. It can also upset your client and your reputation. In this case, we’ve let the risk pan out and then reacted to it. This is not typically a good option, but can be considered for very low probability or low-cost risks. Whatever the case, it pays to analyze your risk before deciding which way to execute your response to maintain the integrity of your project. Assess the impact of the risk. Look at how much control you need to put in place and when to get the optimal risk management result. And share your thoughts with your stakeholders so you don’t trigger stakeholder risks and arguments.</p>

<h2 id="3-assess-overall-project-risk">3. Assess overall project risk</h2>

<p>If you aren’t careful, you can create a substantial risk while managing risk on your project. While you deal with risks that are tied to tasks, you can forget what you’re really here for: to deliver an entire project. We need to step back and see, as they say, the forest through the trees. We need to assess overall project risk. There are two major considerations when evaluating overall project risk. First, your ability to deliver the project with the risks you know about, and then controlling the various directions the project can take to reach a conclusion. Let’s take a look at each of these. Risks, should they come to pass, will have an impact on your project outcomes, along with the money and time it takes to deliver those outcomes. If the impacts of your risks or the cost to address those risks outweigh the benefits you’ll get from the project, you probably shouldn’t proceed. For example, if you work in an insurance company developing new products, you need to watch insurance regulations to be sure you can legally sell the products you design. Let’s say the government starts discussing new regulations and your experts determine there’s a 70% chance a law change will make your new insurance offering illegal to sell. You might want to reconsider your project as being too high risk until you know more about the regulations that are put into law. This was a very high risk example. It isn’t always that obvious. So, the viability of your project should be examined frequently. As your individual risks change, so will your overall project risk. This should be reviewed with your sponsor on a regular basis. Then, your ability to control the various directions your project takes is the other major factor to consider when addressing overall project risk. As your project unfolds, unexpected discoveries may surface. So, let’s say the technical approach planned for your project turns out to have more variables than you expected. I had this happen on an IT project I managed. After starting the project, my company bought another small company as a means of expanding their product offerings. This new scope created many complications. What started as a straightforward technical solution was going to have to interact with three other systems. So I had a larger number of variables to consider. I could no longer reliably predict what course of action was best to deliver the project. This introduced significant risk, and we canceled the project to allow us to study our options and launch a new project. Other examples of overall project risk are in the exercise files for the course. Overall risk is the key to determine if a project is appropriate. Surfacing concerns with overall risk isn’t a failure on your part. Rather, it’s the smart thing to do to protect your organization. Though many might see big healthy trees around you, making sure you’re in the right forest is one of your jobs as a project manager.</p>

<h2 id="4-agile-risk-management">4. Agile risk management</h2>

<p>Ever have the feeling you’ve experienced something before like your life history is repeating itself? When you’re managing risk on an agile project, that’s the case and it’s absolutely fantastic. The iterative nature of an agile project is ideal for risk management if you have the right mindset. Here are my recommendations for performing risk management in an agile environment. First, understand that by design risks will change more rapidly in an agile environment. At the end of every sprint you may add, delete, or reprioritize features. This flexibility in providing functionality for the client is great, but it also changes the risk profile for your upcoming sprint and potentially the entire project. For example, let’s say you’re working on a project to create an executive dashboard for your company. The dashboard will provide your senior management team with critical information about financial status, competitors’ performance, and sales projections. Each feature that is produced could surface risks such as ensuring that data retrieved for the dashboard is up-to-date, information is from the same timeframe when combined with other datasets, ensuring search capabilities for the executives will yield the intended report. As the executives use each feature and ask for new capabilities, the chances of these risks increasing or other risks surfacing is very high. Diligence in managing these rapidly changing risks is critical. The second characteristic is fortunately that risks can be revisited naturally due to the agile life cycle. Given the dashboard project that I’ve just shared with you, at the end of each sprint the backlog of features will be reviewed and reprioritized. This is a very convenient and appropriate time to revisit risk. New features, the sequence used to produce features, and reviewing the results of features already produced are a great source of potential risk going forward. Taking time at the end of each sprint to review risk should be part of the habits your agile team uses to manage your project. Third, risks can be assessed frequently. As agile sprints are typically only a few weeks long, reviewing risks at the end of each sprint creates a risk management culture within the project. In our project example, the project team and executives that are using the dashboard can discuss risks while the information is fresh. So the concept of risk management is kept front of mind while progressing the project. Leveraging the agile life cycle to control your risk is one of the greatest benefits agile brings to project management. Take full advantage of this, as it’s a prudent way to ensure risks are known and addressed during your project. I guess it’s one of those instances where history repeating itself is a good thing.</p>
:ET