I"*$<h2 id="legal-ethical-and-social-issues-of-data-science">Legal, ethical, and social issues of data science</h2>

<p>Data science can make you feel like a superhero who’s here to save the world or at least your business’s world. But an alarming amount of data work can also end up in court or on the wrong side of a protest so I want to talk about a few things that can help keep you, your company and your data science work on the up and up. First, there are some important legal issues. Now it used to be when data science first came about, you know, oh, 10 years ago, we were kind of in the Wild West and people just kind of did what they wanted but now we’ve had some major developments in the legal frameworks that govern data and its use. Probably the most important of these is an entire collection of privacy laws, the most significant of which at the moment is the GDPR, that’s the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation. This is a law about privacy that has some very serious teeth. It can potentially have fines of billions of dollars for companies that seriously violate its policies. This is why you have so many cookie notices and why opting in becomes such an important thing when you go to a website. And in the United States, there are a lot of other regulations that also affect privacy, things like HIPAA, that’s the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act and FERPA, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act. And then there are state laws like the California Consumer Privacy Act. All of these place serious regulations on how you can gather data, the consent that you need to get from people, what you can do from the data, whether people can request it, whether they can be forgotten from the system and it’s important for you to remember all of these so you don’t end up crossing a very significant line when doing your work. And I want to remind you, it’s not just the 31 member states of the European Union and the European Economic Area that have these kinds of privacy laws. They’re spreading around all over the world and there are more coming every day. I mean, that’s an awful lot of the world that’s covered by these various regulations that you need to keep in mind when doing your work. The next thing is ethical issues. These may or may not specifically address legal barriers but they have a lot to do with how your work is perceived. Now for instance, there are the three forms of fairness. We talked about distributing things by equity, that is proportional to some kind of input or equality, everybody gets the same amount or need, the people who need the most, and get the most. Or forms of justice. This includes distributive justice which is the actual things that you end up with, procedural justice, how are the decisions made and interactional justice, how is the decision communicated? How are people involved in it? And then there’s issues of authenticity. You need to know who you’re dealing with and what you’re dealing with and none of these specifically address legal issues but they have a very big impact on whether people feel that your organization and your work is ethical and can be trusted and whether they want to engage with you. And that finally gets to the social issues. Whenever you or your company or clients engage with people, you need to engage with them with respect. People don’t like getting fooled, they don’t like getting exploited, they don’t like getting ignored and all of those are serious risks when working with data and don’t forget that unpopular projects can lead to protests, by the general populace and walkouts by the people in your own company and so, there’s a lot more that I could say about all of these and in fact, in another course, AI Accountability Essential Training, I do say a lot more about every one of these elements and all of them can have an impact on your ability to use data to do something that’s productive for your company but not just in the short term, also in the long term in a way that is sustainable and respective of the people and the environment that you work in.</p>

<h2 id="agency-of-algorithms-and-decision-makers">Agency of algorithms and decision-makers</h2>

<p>When we think about Artificial Intelligence and how it works, and how it might make decisions, and act on it’s own, we tend to think of things like this. You’ve got the robot holding the computer right next to you. But the fact is, most of the time when we’re dealing with Artificial Intelligence, it’s something a lot closer to this. Nevertheless, I want to suggest at least four ways that working data science can contribute to the interplay of human and Artificial Intelligence of personal and machine agency. The first is what I call simple Recommendations. And then there’s Human-in-the-Loop decision making. Then Human-Accessible decisions, and then Machine-Centric processing and action. And I want to talk a little more about each of these. Let’s start with Recommendations. This is where the algorithm processes your data and makes a recommendation, or suggestion to you and you can either take it or leave it. A few places where this approach shows up are things like, for instance, online shopping, where you have a recommendation engine that says “Based on your past purchase history, “you might want to look at this.” Or, the same thing with online movies or music, it looks at what you did, it looks at what you like, and it suggests other things. And, you can decide whether you want to pick up on that or not. Another one is an online News Feed. This says “Based on what you’ve clicked in the past “and the things that you’ve selected, “you might like this.” It’s a little bit different, because this time it’s just a yes or no decision. But, it’s still up to you what you click on. Another one is Maps, where you enter your location and it suggests a route to you based on traffic, based on time and you can follow it or you can do something else if you want. But in all of these, data science is being used to take, truly, a huge amount of information about your own past behavior, about what other people have done under similar circumstances, and how that can be combined to give the most likely recommendations to you. But, the agency still rests in the human. They get to decide what to do. Next is Human-in-the-Loop decision making. And, this is where advanced algorithms can make and even implement their own decisions, as with self-driving cars. And, I remember the first time my car turned it’s steering wheel on it’s own. But humans are usually at the ready to take over, if needed. Another example might be something as simple as spam filters. You go in every now and then, and you check up on how well it’s performing. So, it can do it on it’s own, but you need to be there to take over just in case. A third kind of decision making in the interplay between the algorithm and the human is what I call Human-Accessible decision making. Many algorithmic decisions are made automatically, and even implemented automatically. But they’re designed such that humans can at least understand what happened in them. Such as, for instance, with an online mortgage application. You put the information in, and it can tell you immediately whether you’re accepted or rejected. But because of recent laws, such as the European Union GDPR, that’s the General Data Protection Regulation, the organizations who run these algorithms need to be able to interpret how it reached its decision. Even if they’re not usually involving humans in making of the decisions, it still has to be open to humans. And then finally, there’s Machine-Centric. And this is when machines are talking to other machines. And the best example of this is the internet of things. And that can include things like Wearables. My smart watch talks to my phone, which talks to the internet, which talks to my car in sharing and processing data at each point. Also Smart Homes. You can say hello to your Smart Speaker which turns on the lights, adjusts the temperature, starts the coffee, plays the news and so on. And there are Smart Grids, which allows for example, for two way communication between maybe a power utility and the houses or businesses they serve. It lets them have more efficient routing end of power, recovery from blackouts, integration with consumer generated power, and so on. The important thing about this one is this last category, the Machine-Centric decisions or the internet of things, is starting to constitute an enormous amount of the data that’s available for data science work. But any one of these approaches from the Simple Recommendations up to the Machine-Centric, all of them show the different kinds of relationships between data, human decision makers, and machine algorithms, and the conclusions that they reach. Any one of these is going to work in different circumstances. And so it’s your job, as somebody who may be working in data science, to find the best balance of the speed and efficiency of machine decision making and respect for the autonomy and individuality of the humans that you’re interacting with.</p>
:ET